SLIDE 1 - TITLE and CONTACT DETAILS

Introduction

First of all, thanks for choosing to come to my presentation, particularly when there are so many high calibre talks to choose from. A huge thanks also to Bianca and to Robyn for organising today's Haecksen miniconf. 

If you're hearing impaired, there's a transcript of this talk available 
(transcript)

My name is Kathy Reid - I'm @KathyReid on Twitter, GitHub etc, and my day job is at a Victorian university doing a variety of digital things. Outside of work I'm really keen about knitting and exploring technology, and today I'd like to take you on a journey around the intersection of these two passions. 

SLIDE 2 - ELIOT QUOTE

Life always presents us with choices. Sometimes those choices are easy - tea or coffee, black shirt or white, Aussie rules or soccer. Generally though they're more nuanced - and the same is true for technology and the way in which we respond to it. 

We make choices about technology every day - whether we're conscious of them or not - which operating system to use, which software to use, iPhone or Android, which tablet, how much to share or not share, and indeed choosing when to turn off. 

What we're perhaps not so conscious of - yet - is that it's becoming easier to make and modify our own technology. If we're not happy with how something works, we're able to make it better, void its warranty - and hack it. We can CHOOSE to improve it. 

Realising that you have a choice is the difference between;

SLIDE 3 - CHICK HATCHING OUT OF EGG

breaking free of your constraints

SLIDE 4 - BACON AND EGGS

or having someone else determine your future!

So, what does that all mean in terms of technology?

It means that once we choose that we want to have more control over technology, we need the tools to be able to exert that control. 

In the open hardware scene, we're seeing adoption of 3D printers such as Reprap and MakerBot. In the home automation scene, tools such as Arduino, Xigbee and Ninja Blocks are carving a niche that used to be filled with proprietary systems such as AMX and Extron. 

But what about smart crafting and textiles?

SLIDE 5 - LILYPAD ARDUINO

Enter: Lilypad Arduino - designed by a lady called Leah Buechley, Lilypad Arduino is designed to foster the development of electronic textiles - smart crafting with sensors, lights - really, anything you want to imagine. 

SLIDE 6 - LILYPAD JEWELLERY

You can even use Lilypad Arduino to create interactive jewellery.

SLIDE 7 - REQUIREMENTS

So, what do you need to get started working with Lilypad Ardunio

1. You'll need some Arduino components, such as main board, sensors and outputs.
Here's a selection of some of the pieces.
If you're working with eTextiles, you'll also need some conductive thread.
You'll also need a USB cable to connect to your Lilypad board for programming. 

2. You'll need to install the Arduino IDE environment - it's available for all major platforms.

Above all though you'll need your IMAGINATION.

What I'd like to do now is walk you through two very simple Lilypad Arduino projects.
One is a completed project, and I'll walk you through the code while demonstrating the article.

The second is a work in progress and I'll provide some tips and tricks for working with Arduino Lilypad at this stage.

SLIDE 8 - Light Scarf

(Kathy demonstrates Light Scarf)

The premise behind this project is that if it's dark at night, and you're possibly in a dangerous neighbourhood, then it would be handy if your accessories provided some light to guide you - and deter would-be predators. Enter the LightScarf. This scarf uses a light detection sensor, part of the Lilypad range, and if the surrounding light levels drop below a threshold, then it lights up an LED on the scarf.

This was my first Lilypad Arduino project, and the key challenge was that I couldn't fit more than one LED on to the actual scarf. The battery design here is also very chunky - and while it's well hidden in a chunky looking scarf, there are probably better ways to incorporate it from a design point of view. 

SLIDE 9 - Temperature sensing beanie

(Kathy demonstrates Temp Sensing Beanie)

The purpose of this little project was to see if a beanie that senses temperature, and indicates if the person wearing it is too hot - such as with a fever, was possible. It's still under development, and I've come up against a couple of challenges. 

Firstly, the thermistor component which senses the temperature is reliant on a reference voltage from the Lilypad board. The voltage can fluctuate dependending on the length of the run of the conductive thread, so getting an accurate temperature reading was a challenge. Also, sewing the components in in such a way that they're visually appealling, and don't cause discomfort for the wearer - is going to be a challenge. 

SLIDE 10 - SUMMARY

As you can see, the applications of eTextiles, and specifically Lilypad Arduino, are boundless.
What about clothing that can detect when say an autistic child is near a body of water?
What about clothing that can be used to notify someone if a cancer patient has a life-threatening temperature?
Fabric that lets you know what your heart rate is?

So, in conclusion I invite you to make an active choice with technology.
I encourage you to explore open source e-textiles such as Lilypad Arduino, and to dream of what's possible. 

Thank you. 
 

PHOTO CREDITS

Bacon and Eggs - Katherine Lim - http://www.flickr.com/photos/ultrakml/8173785593

Chick hatched from egg - Rick Kimpel - www.flickr.com/photos/rkimpeljr/201204913

Lilypad bits - Rain Rabbit - http://www.flickr.com/photos/37996583811@N01/4694510950

Lilypad jewellery - savagejen - http://www.flickr.com/photos/miserynotes/4429968289
